# 23 Minimum Spanning Trees

Electronic circuit designs often need to make the pins of several components electrically equivalent by wiring them together. To interconnect a set of n pins, we can use an arrangement of n  1 wires, each connecting two pins. Of all such arrangements, the one that uses the least amount of wire is usually the most desirable. We can model this wiring problem with a connected, undirected graph G D .V; E/, where V is the set of pins, E is the set of possible interconnections between pairs of pins, and for each edge .u; / 2 E, we have a weight w.u; / specifying the cost (amount of wire needed) to connect u and . We then wish to ﬁnd an acyclic subset T  E that connects all of the vertices and whose total weight w.T / D X .u;/2T w.u; / is minimized. Since T is acyclic and connects all of the vertices, it must form a tree, which we call a spanning tree since it “spans” the graph G. We call the problem of determining the tree T the minimum-spanning-tree problem.1 Figure 23.1 shows an example of a connected graph and a minimum spanning tree. In this chapter, we shall examine two algorithms for solving the minimumspanning-tree problem: Kruskal’s algorithm and Prim’s algorithm. We can easily make each of them run in time O.E lg V / using ordinary binary heaps. By using Fibonacci heaps, Prim’s algorithm runs in time O.E C V lg V /, which improves over the binary-heap implementation if jV j is much smaller than jEj. The two algorithms are greedy algorithms, as described in Chapter 16. Each step of a greedy algorithm must make one of several possible choices. The greedy strategy advocates making the choice that is the best at the moment. Such a strategy does not generally guarantee that it will always ﬁnd globally optimal solutions 1The phrase “minimum spanning tree” is a shortened form of the phrase “minimum-weight spanning tree.” We are not, for example, minimizing the number of edges in T , since all spanning trees have exactly jV j  1 edges by Theorem B.2.

## 23.1 Growing a minimum spanning tree

b a h c g i d f e Figure 23.1 A minimum spanning tree for a connected graph. The weights on edges are shown, and the edges in a minimum spanning tree are shaded. The total weight of the tree shown is 37. This minimum spanning tree is not unique: removing the edge .b; c/ and replacing it with the edge .a; h/ yields another spanning tree with weight 37. to problems. For the minimum-spanning-tree problem, however, we can prove that certain greedy strategies do yield a spanning tree with minimum weight. Although you can read this chapter independently of Chapter 16, the greedy methods presented here are a classic application of the theoretical notions introduced there.

Section 23.1 introduces a “generic” minimum-spanning-tree method that grows a spanning tree by adding one edge at a time. Section 23.2 gives two algorithms that implement the generic method. The ﬁrst algorithm, due to Kruskal, is similar to the connected-components algorithm from Section 21.1. The second, due to Prim, resembles Dijkstra’s shortest-paths algorithm (Section 24.3).

Because a tree is a type of graph, in order to be precise we must deﬁne a tree in terms of not just its edges, but its vertices as well. Although this chapter focuses on trees in terms of their edges, we shall operate with the understanding that the vertices of a tree T are those that some edge of T is incident on.

## 23.1 Growing a minimum spanning tree

Assume that we have a connected, undirected graph G D .V; E/ with a weight function w W E ! R, and we wish to ﬁnd a minimum spanning tree for G. The two algorithms we consider in this chapter use a greedy approach to the problem, although they differ in how they apply this approach. This greedy strategy is captured by the following generic method, which grows the minimum spanning tree one edge at a time. The generic method manages a set of edges A, maintaining the following loop invariant:

Prior to each iteration, A is a subset of some minimum spanning tree.

At each step, we determine an edge .u; / that we can add to A without violating this invariant, in the sense that A[f.u; /g is also a subset of a minimum spanning

tree. We call such an edge a safe edge for A, since we can add it safely to A while maintaining the invariant.

GENERIC-MST.G; w/ A D ; while A does not form a spanning tree ﬁnd an edge .u; / that is safe for A A D A [ f.u; /g return A We use the loop invariant as follows: Initialization: After line 1, the set A trivially satisﬁes the loop invariant.

Maintenance: The loop in lines 2–4 maintains the invariant by adding only safe edges.

Termination: All edges added to A are in a minimum spanning tree, and so the set A returned in line 5 must be a minimum spanning tree. The tricky part is, of course, ﬁnding a safe edge in line 3. One must exist, since when line 3 is executed, the invariant dictates that there is a spanning tree T such that A  T . Within the while loop body, A must be a proper subset of T , and therefore there must be an edge .u; / 2 T such that .u; / 62 A and .u; / is safe for A. In the remainder of this section, we provide a rule (Theorem 23.1) for recognizing safe edges. The next section describes two algorithms that use this rule to ﬁnd safe edges efﬁciently. We ﬁrst need some deﬁnitions. A cut .S; V  S/ of an undirected graph G D .V; E/ is a partition of V . Figure 23.2 illustrates this notion. We say that an edge .u; / 2 E crosses the cut .S; V  S/ if one of its endpoints is in S and the other is in V  S. We say that a cut respects a set A of edges if no edge in A crosses the cut. An edge is a light edge crossing a cut if its weight is the minimum of any edge crossing the cut. Note that there can be more than one light edge crossing a cut in the case of ties. More generally, we say that an edge is a light edge satisfying a given property if its weight is the minimum of any edge satisfying the property.

Our rule for recognizing safe edges is given by the following theorem.

> **Theorem 23.1**

Let G D .V; E/ be a connected, undirected graph with a real-valued weight function w deﬁned on E. Let A be a subset of E that is included in some minimum spanning tree for G, let .S; V  S/ be any cut of G that respects A, and let .u; / be a light edge crossing .S; V  S/. Then, edge .u; / is safe for A.

## 23.1 Growing a minimum spanning tree

b a h c g i d f e a b d e h i g c f S (a) (b) V – S S V – S S V – S Figure 23.2 Two ways of viewing a cut .S; V  S/ of the graph from Figure 23.1. (a) Black vertices are in the set S, and white vertices are in V  S. The edges crossing the cut are those connecting white vertices with black vertices. The edge .d; c/ is the unique light edge crossing the cut. A subset A of the edges is shaded; note that the cut .S; V  S/ respects A, since no edge of A crosses the cut. (b) The same graph with the vertices in the set S on the left and the vertices in the set V  S on the right. An edge crosses the cut if it connects a vertex on the left with a vertex on the right.

Proof Let T be a minimum spanning tree that includes A, and assume that T does not contain the light edge .u; /, since if it does, we are done. We shall construct another minimum spanning tree T 0 that includes A [ f.u; /g by using a cut-and-paste technique, thereby showing that .u; / is a safe edge for A. The edge .u; / forms a cycle with the edges on the simple path p from u to  in T , as Figure 23.3 illustrates. Since u and  are on opposite sides of the cut .S; V  S/, at least one edge in T lies on the simple path p and also crosses the cut. Let .x; y/ be any such edge. The edge .x; y/ is not in A, because the cut respects A. Since .x; y/ is on the unique simple path from u to  in T , removing .x; y/ breaks T into two components. Adding .u; / reconnects them to form a new spanning tree T 0 D T  f.x; y/g [ f.u; /g. We next show that T 0 is a minimum spanning tree. Since .u; / is a light edge crossing .S; V S/ and .x; y/ also crosses this cut, w.u; /  w.x; y/. Therefore, w.T 0/ D w.T /  w.x; y/ C w.u; /  w.T / :

y v u x p Figure 23.3 The proof of Theorem 23.1. Black vertices are in S, and white vertices are in V  S. The edges in the minimum spanning tree T are shown, but the edges in the graph G are not. The edges in A are shaded, and .u;/ is a light edge crossing the cut .S; V  S/. The edge .x; y/ is an edge on the unique simple path p from u to  in T . To form a minimum spanning tree T 0 that contains .u; /, remove the edge .x; y/ from T and add the edge .u; /.

But T is a minimum spanning tree, so that w.T /  w.T 0/; thus, T 0 must be a minimum spanning tree also. It remains to show that .u; / is actually a safe edge for A. We have A  T 0, since A  T and .x; y/ 62 A; thus, A [ f.u; /g  T 0. Consequently, since T 0 is a minimum spanning tree, .u; / is safe for A.

> **Theorem 23.1 gives us a better understanding of the workings of the GENERIC-**

MST method on a connected graph G D .V; E/. As the method proceeds, the set A is always acyclic; otherwise, a minimum spanning tree including A would contain a cycle, which is a contradiction. At any point in the execution, the graph GA D .V; A/ is a forest, and each of the connected components of GA is a tree. (Some of the trees may contain just one vertex, as is the case, for example, when the method begins: A is empty and the forest contains jV j trees, one for each vertex.) Moreover, any safe edge .u; / for A connects distinct components of GA, since A [ f.u; /g must be acyclic. The while loop in lines 2–4 of GENERIC-MST executes jV j  1 times because it ﬁnds one of the jV j  1 edges of a minimum spanning tree in each iteration. Initially, when A D ;, there are jV j trees in GA, and each iteration reduces that number by 1. When the forest contains only a single tree, the method terminates. The two algorithms in Section 23.2 use the following corollary to Theorem 23.1.

## 23.1 Growing a minimum spanning tree

> **Corollary 23.2**

Let G D .V; E/ be a connected, undirected graph with a real-valued weight function w deﬁned on E. Let A be a subset of E that is included in some minimum spanning tree for G, and let C D .VC; EC/ be a connected component (tree) in the forest GA D .V; A/. If .u; / is a light edge connecting C to some other component in GA, then .u; / is safe for A.

Proof The cut .VC; V  VC/ respects A, and .u; / is a light edge for this cut. Therefore, .u; / is safe for A.

## Exercises

23.1-1 Let .u; / be a minimum-weight edge in a connected graph G. Show that .u; / belongs to some minimum spanning tree of G. 23.1-2 Professor Sabatier conjectures the following converse of Theorem 23.1. Let G D .V; E/ be a connected, undirected graph with a real-valued weight function w de- ﬁned on E. Let A be a subset of E that is included in some minimum spanning tree for G, let .S; V  S/ be any cut of G that respects A, and let .u; / be a safe edge for A crossing .S; V  S/. Then, .u; / is a light edge for the cut. Show that the professor’s conjecture is incorrect by giving a counterexample. 23.1-3 Show that if an edge .u; / is contained in some minimum spanning tree, then it is a light edge crossing some cut of the graph. 23.1-4 Give a simple example of a connected graph such that the set of edges f.u; / W there exists a cut .S; V  S/ such that .u; / is a light edge crossing .S; V  S/g does not form a minimum spanning tree. 23.1-5 Let e be a maximum-weight edge on some cycle of connected graph G D .V; E/.

Prove that there is a minimum spanning tree of G0 D .V; E  feg/ that is also a minimum spanning tree of G. That is, there is a minimum spanning tree of G that does not include e.

23.1-6 Show that a graph has a unique minimum spanning tree if, for every cut of the graph, there is a unique light edge crossing the cut. Show that the converse is not true by giving a counterexample. 23.1-7 Argue that if all edge weights of a graph are positive, then any subset of edges that connects all vertices and has minimum total weight must be a tree. Give an example to show that the same conclusion does not follow if we allow some weights to be nonpositive. 23.1-8 Let T be a minimum spanning tree of a graph G, and let L be the sorted list of the edge weights of T . Show that for any other minimum spanning tree T 0 of G, the list L is also the sorted list of edge weights of T 0. 23.1-9 Let T be a minimum spanning tree of a graph G D .V; E/, and let V 0 be a subset of V . Let T 0 be the subgraph of T induced by V 0, and let G0 be the subgraph of G induced by V 0. Show that if T 0 is connected, then T 0 is a minimum spanning tree of G0. 23.1-10 Given a graph G and a minimum spanning tree T , suppose that we decrease the weight of one of the edges in T . Show that T is still a minimum spanning tree for G. More formally, let T be a minimum spanning tree for G with edge weights given by weight function w. Choose one edge .x; y/ 2 T and a positive number k, and deﬁne the weight function w0 by w0.u; / D ( w.u; / if .u; / ¤ .x; y/ ; w.x; y/  k if .u; / D .x; y/ :

Show that T is a minimum spanning tree for G with edge weights given by w0. 23.1-11 ?

Given a graph G and a minimum spanning tree T , suppose that we decrease the weight of one of the edges not in T . Give an algorithm for ﬁnding the minimum spanning tree in the modiﬁed graph.

## 23.2 The algorithms of Kruskal and Prim

## 23.2 The algorithms of Kruskal and Prim

The two minimum-spanning-tree algorithms described in this section elaborate on the generic method. They each use a speciﬁc rule to determine a safe edge in line 3 of GENERIC-MST. In Kruskal’s algorithm, the set A is a forest whose vertices are all those of the given graph. The safe edge added to A is always a least-weight edge in the graph that connects two distinct components. In Prim’s algorithm, the set A forms a single tree. The safe edge added to A is always a least-weight edge connecting the tree to a vertex not in the tree.

Kruskal’s algorithm Kruskal’s algorithm ﬁnds a safe edge to add to the growing forest by ﬁnding, of all the edges that connect any two trees in the forest, an edge .u; / of least weight.

Let C1 and C2 denote the two trees that are connected by .u; /. Since .u; / must be a light edge connecting C1 to some other tree, Corollary 23.2 implies that .u; / is a safe edge for C1. Kruskal’s algorithm qualiﬁes as a greedy algorithm because at each step it adds to the forest an edge of least possible weight.

Our implementation of Kruskal’s algorithm is like the algorithm to compute connected components from Section 21.1. It uses a disjoint-set data structure to maintain several disjoint sets of elements. Each set contains the vertices in one tree of the current forest. The operation FIND-SET.u/ returns a representative element from the set that contains u. Thus, we can determine whether two vertices u and  belong to the same tree by testing whether FIND-SET.u/ equals FIND-SET./. To combine trees, Kruskal’s algorithm calls the UNION procedure.

MST-KRUSKAL.G; w/ A D ; for each vertex  2 G:V MAKE-SET./ sort the edges of G:E into nondecreasing order by weight w for each edge .u; / 2 G:E, taken in nondecreasing order by weight if FIND-SET.u/ ¤ FIND-SET./ A D A [ f.u; /g UNION.u; / return A Figure 23.4 shows how Kruskal’s algorithm works. Lines 1–3 initialize the set A to the empty set and create jV j trees, one containing each vertex. The for loop in lines 5–8 examines edges in order of weight, from lowest to highest. The loop

b a h c g i d f e (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (g) (f) (h) b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e Figure 23.4 The execution of Kruskal’s algorithm on the graph from Figure 23.1. Shaded edges belong to the forest A being grown. The algorithm considers each edge in sorted order by weight. An arrow points to the edge under consideration at each step of the algorithm. If the edge joins two distinct trees in the forest, it is added to the forest, thereby merging the two trees. checks, for each edge .u; /, whether the endpoints u and  belong to the same tree. If they do, then the edge .u; / cannot be added to the forest without creating a cycle, and the edge is discarded. Otherwise, the two vertices belong to different trees. In this case, line 7 adds the edge .u; / to A, and line 8 merges the vertices in the two trees.

## 23.2 The algorithms of Kruskal and Prim

(i) (j) (k) (l) (n) (m) b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e Figure 23.4, continued Further steps in the execution of Kruskal’s algorithm. The running time of Kruskal’s algorithm for a graph G D .V; E/ depends on how we implement the disjoint-set data structure. We assume that we use the disjoint-set-forest implementation of Section 21.3 with the union-by-rank and path-compression heuristics, since it is the asymptotically fastest implementation known. Initializing the set A in line 1 takes O.1/ time, and the time to sort the edges in line 4 is O.E lg E/. (We will account for the cost of the jV j MAKE-SET operations in the for loop of lines 2–3 in a moment.) The for loop of lines 5–8 performs O.E/ FIND-SET and UNION operations on the disjoint-set forest. Along with the jV j MAKE-SET operations, these take a total of O..V C E/ ˛.V // time, where ˛ is the very slowly growing function deﬁned in Section 21.4. Because we assume that G is connected, we have jEj  jV j  1, and so the disjoint-set operations take O.E˛.V // time. Moreover, since ˛.jV j/ D O.lg V / D O.lg E/, the total running time of Kruskal’s algorithm is O.E lg E/. Observing that jEj < jV j2, we have lg jEj D O.lg V /, and so we can restate the running time of Kruskal’s algorithm as O.E lg V /.

Prim’s algorithm Like Kruskal’s algorithm, Prim’s algorithm is a special case of the generic minimum-spanning-tree method from Section 23.1. Prim’s algorithm operates much like Dijkstra’s algorithm for ﬁnding shortest paths in a graph, which we shall see in Section 24.3. Prim’s algorithm has the property that the edges in the set A always form a single tree. As Figure 23.5 shows, the tree starts from an arbitrary root vertex r and grows until the tree spans all the vertices in V . Each step adds to the tree A a light edge that connects A to an isolated vertex—one on which no edge of A is incident. By Corollary 23.2, this rule adds only edges that are safe for A; therefore, when the algorithm terminates, the edges in A form a minimum spanning tree. This strategy qualiﬁes as greedy since at each step it adds to the tree an edge that contributes the minimum amount possible to the tree’s weight. In order to implement Prim’s algorithm efﬁciently, we need a fast way to select a new edge to add to the tree formed by the edges in A. In the pseudocode below, the connected graph G and the root r of the minimum spanning tree to be grown are inputs to the algorithm. During execution of the algorithm, all vertices that are not in the tree reside in a min-priority queue Q based on a key attribute. For each vertex , the attribute :key is the minimum weight of any edge connecting  to a vertex in the tree; by convention, :key D 1 if there is no such edge. The attribute : names the parent of  in the tree. The algorithm implicitly maintains the set A from GENERIC-MST as A D f.; :/ W  2 V  frg  Qg :

When the algorithm terminates, the min-priority queue Q is empty; the minimum spanning tree A for G is thus A D f.; :/ W  2 V  frgg :

MST-PRIM.G; w; r/ for each u 2 G:V u:key D 1 u: D NIL r:key D 0 Q D G:V while Q ¤ ; u D EXTRACT-MIN.Q/ for each  2 G:AdjŒu if  2 Q and w.u; / < :key : D u :key D w.u; /

## 23.2 The algorithms of Kruskal and Prim

(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e b a h c g i d f e Figure 23.5 The execution of Prim’s algorithm on the graph from Figure 23.1. The root vertex is a. Shaded edges are in the tree being grown, and black vertices are in the tree. At each step of the algorithm, the vertices in the tree determine a cut of the graph, and a light edge crossing the cut is added to the tree. In the second step, for example, the algorithm has a choice of adding either edge .b; c/ or edge .a; h/ to the tree since both are light edges crossing the cut.

Figure 23.5 shows how Prim’s algorithm works. Lines 1–5 set the key of each vertex to 1 (except for the root r, whose key is set to 0 so that it will be the ﬁrst vertex processed), set the parent of each vertex to NIL, and initialize the minpriority queue Q to contain all the vertices. The algorithm maintains the following three-part loop invariant:

Prior to each iteration of the while loop of lines 6–11, 1. A D f.; :/ W  2 V  frg  Qg. 2. The vertices already placed into the minimum spanning tree are those in V  Q. 3. For all vertices  2 Q, if : ¤ NIL, then :key < 1 and :key is the weight of a light edge .; :/ connecting  to some vertex already placed into the minimum spanning tree.

Line 7 identiﬁes a vertex u 2 Q incident on a light edge that crosses the cut .V  Q; Q/ (with the exception of the ﬁrst iteration, in which u D r due to line 4).

Removing u from the set Q adds it to the set V  Q of vertices in the tree, thus adding .u; u:/ to A. The for loop of lines 8–11 updates the key and  attributes of every vertex  adjacent to u but not in the tree, thereby maintaining the third part of the loop invariant. The running time of Prim’s algorithm depends on how we implement the minpriority queue Q. If we implement Q as a binary min-heap (see Chapter 6), we can use the BUILD-MIN-HEAP procedure to perform lines 1–5 in O.V / time. The body of the while loop executes jV j times, and since each EXTRACT-MIN operation takes O.lg V / time, the total time for all calls to EXTRACT-MIN is O.V lg V /. The for loop in lines 8–11 executes O.E/ times altogether, since the sum of the lengths of all adjacency lists is 2 jEj. Within the for loop, we can implement the test for membership in Q in line 9 in constant time by keeping a bit for each vertex that tells whether or not it is in Q, and updating the bit when the vertex is removed from Q. The assignment in line 11 involves an implicit DECREASE-KEY operation on the min-heap, which a binary min-heap supports in O.lg V / time. Thus, the total time for Prim’s algorithm is O.V lg V C E lg V / D O.E lg V /, which is asymptotically the same as for our implementation of Kruskal’s algorithm. We can improve the asymptotic running time of Prim’s algorithm by using Fibonacci heaps. Chapter 19 shows that if a Fibonacci heap holds jV j elements, an EXTRACT-MIN operation takes O.lg V / amortized time and a DECREASE-KEY operation (to implement line 11) takes O.1/ amortized time. Therefore, if we use a Fibonacci heap to implement the min-priority queue Q, the running time of Prim’s algorithm improves to O.E C V lg V /.

## 23.2 The algorithms of Kruskal and Prim

## Exercises

23.2-1 Kruskal’s algorithm can return different spanning trees for the same input graph G, depending on how it breaks ties when the edges are sorted into order. Show that for each minimum spanning tree T of G, there is a way to sort the edges of G in Kruskal’s algorithm so that the algorithm returns T . 23.2-2 Suppose that we represent the graph G D .V; E/ as an adjacency matrix. Give a simple implementation of Prim’s algorithm for this case that runs in O.V 2/ time. 23.2-3 For a sparse graph G D .V; E/, where jEj D ‚.V /, is the implementation of Prim’s algorithm with a Fibonacci heap asymptotically faster than the binary-heap implementation?

What about for a dense graph, where jEj D ‚.V 2/? How must the sizes jEj and jV j be related for the Fibonacci-heap implementation to be asymptotically faster than the binary-heap implementation? 23.2-4 Suppose that all edge weights in a graph are integers in the range from 1 to jV j.

How fast can you make Kruskal’s algorithm run? What if the edge weights are integers in the range from 1 to W for some constant W ? 23.2-5 Suppose that all edge weights in a graph are integers in the range from 1 to jV j.

How fast can you make Prim’s algorithm run? What if the edge weights are integers in the range from 1 to W for some constant W ? 23.2-6 ?

Suppose that the edge weights in a graph are uniformly distributed over the halfopen interval Œ0; 1/. Which algorithm, Kruskal’s or Prim’s, can you make run faster? 23.2-7 ?

Suppose that a graph G has a minimum spanning tree already computed. How quickly can we update the minimum spanning tree if we add a new vertex and incident edges to G? 23.2-8 Professor Borden proposes a new divide-and-conquer algorithm for computing minimum spanning trees, which goes as follows. Given a graph G D .V; E/, partition the set V of vertices into two sets V1 and V2 such that jV1j and jV2j differ

by at most 1. Let E1 be the set of edges that are incident only on vertices in V1, and let E2 be the set of edges that are incident only on vertices in V2. Recursively solve a minimum-spanning-tree problem on each of the two subgraphs G1 D .V1; E1/ and G2 D .V2; E2/. Finally, select the minimum-weight edge in E that crosses the cut .V1; V2/, and use this edge to unite the resulting two minimum spanning trees into a single spanning tree.

Either argue that the algorithm correctly computes a minimum spanning tree of G, or provide an example for which the algorithm fails.

## Problems

23-1 Second-best minimum spanning tree Let G D .V; E/ be an undirected, connected graph whose weight function is w W E ! R, and suppose that jEj  jV j and all edge weights are distinct. We deﬁne a second-best minimum spanning tree as follows. Let T be the set of all spanning trees of G, and let T 0 be a minimum spanning tree of G. Then a second-best minimum spanning tree is a spanning tree T such that w.T / D minT 002T fT 0g fw.T 00/g. a. Show that the minimum spanning tree is unique, but that the second-best minimum spanning tree need not be unique. b. Let T be the minimum spanning tree of G.

Prove that G contains edges .u; / 2 T and .x; y/ 62 T such that T  f.u; /g [ f.x; y/g is a second-best minimum spanning tree of G. c. Let T be a spanning tree of G and, for any two vertices u;  2 V , let maxŒu;  denote an edge of maximum weight on the unique simple path between u and  in T . Describe an O.V 2/-time algorithm that, given T , computes maxŒu;  for all u;  2 V . d. Give an efﬁcient algorithm to compute the second-best minimum spanning tree of G. 23-2 Minimum spanning tree in sparse graphs For a very sparse connected graph G D .V; E/, we can further improve upon the O.E C V lg V / running time of Prim’s algorithm with Fibonacci heaps by preprocessing G to decrease the number of vertices before running Prim’s algorithm. In particular, we choose, for each vertex u, the minimum-weight edge .u; / incident on u, and we put .u; / into the minimum spanning tree under construction. We

Problems for Chapter 23 then contract all chosen edges (see Section B.4). Rather than contracting these edges one at a time, we ﬁrst identify sets of vertices that are united into the same new vertex. Then we create the graph that would have resulted from contracting these edges one at a time, but we do so by “renaming” edges according to the sets into which their endpoints were placed. Several edges from the original graph may be renamed the same as each other. In such a case, only one edge results, and its weight is the minimum of the weights of the corresponding original edges. Initially, we set the minimum spanning tree T being constructed to be empty, and for each edge .u; / 2 E, we initialize the attributes .u; /:orig D .u; / and .u; /:c D w.u; /. We use the orig attribute to reference the edge from the initial graph that is associated with an edge in the contracted graph. The c attribute holds the weight of an edge, and as edges are contracted, we update it according to the above scheme for choosing edge weights. The procedure MST-REDUCE takes inputs G and T , and it returns a contracted graph G0 with updated attributes orig0 and c0. The procedure also accumulates edges of G into the minimum spanning tree T .

MST-REDUCE.G; T / for each  2 G:V :mark D FALSE MAKE-SET./ for each u 2 G:V if u:mark == FALSE choose  2 G:AdjŒu such that .u; /:c is minimized UNION.u; / T D T [ f.u; /:origg u:mark D :mark D TRUE G0:V D fFIND-SET./ W  2 G:Vg G0:E D ; for each .x; y/ 2 G:E u D FIND-SET.x/  D FIND-SET.y/ if .u; / 62 G0:E G0:E D G0:E [ f.u; /g .u; /:orig0 D .x; y/:orig .u; /:c0 D .x; y/:c else if .x; y/:c < .u; /:c0 .u; /:orig0 D .x; y/:orig .u; /:c0 D .x; y/:c construct adjacency lists G0:Adj for G0 return G0 and T

a. Let T be the set of edges returned by MST-REDUCE, and let A be the minimum spanning tree of the graph G0 formed by the call MST-PRIM.G0; c0; r/, where c0 is the weight attribute on the edges of G0:E and r is any vertex in G0:V. Prove that T [ f.x; y/:orig0 W .x; y/ 2 Ag is a minimum spanning tree of G. b. Argue that jG0:Vj  jV j =2. c. Show how to implement MST-REDUCE so that it runs in O.E/ time. (Hint:

Use simple data structures.) d. Suppose that we run k phases of MST-REDUCE, using the output G0 produced by one phase as the input G to the next phase and accumulating edges in T .

Argue that the overall running time of the k phases is O.kE/. e. Suppose that after running k phases of MST-REDUCE, as in part (d), we run Prim’s algorithm by calling MST-PRIM.G0; c0; r/, where G0, with weight attribute c0, is returned by the last phase and r is any vertex in G0:V. Show how to pick k so that the overall running time is O.E lg lg V /. Argue that your choice of k minimizes the overall asymptotic running time. f.

For what values of jEj (in terms of jV j) does Prim’s algorithm with preprocessing asymptotically beat Prim’s algorithm without preprocessing? 23-3 Bottleneck spanning tree A bottleneck spanning tree T of an undirected graph G is a spanning tree of G whose largest edge weight is minimum over all spanning trees of G. We say that the value of the bottleneck spanning tree is the weight of the maximum-weight edge in T . a. Argue that a minimum spanning tree is a bottleneck spanning tree.

Part (a) shows that ﬁnding a bottleneck spanning tree is no harder than ﬁnding a minimum spanning tree. In the remaining parts, we will show how to ﬁnd a bottleneck spanning tree in linear time. b. Give a linear-time algorithm that given a graph G and an integer b, determines whether the value of the bottleneck spanning tree is at most b. c. Use your algorithm for part (b) as a subroutine in a linear-time algorithm for the bottleneck-spanning-tree problem. (Hint: You may want to use a subroutine that contracts sets of edges, as in the MST-REDUCE procedure described in Problem 23-2.)

Notes for Chapter 23 23-4 Alternative minimum-spanning-tree algorithms In this problem, we give pseudocode for three different algorithms. Each one takes a connected graph and a weight function as input and returns a set of edges T . For each algorithm, either prove that T is a minimum spanning tree or prove that T is not a minimum spanning tree. Also describe the most efﬁcient implementation of each algorithm, whether or not it computes a minimum spanning tree. a. MAYBE-MST-A.G; w/ sort the edges into nonincreasing order of edge weights w T D E for each edge e, taken in nonincreasing order by weight if T  feg is a connected graph T D T  feg return T b. MAYBE-MST-B.G; w/ T D ; for each edge e, taken in arbitrary order if T [ feg has no cycles T D T [ feg return T c. MAYBE-MST-C.G; w/ T D ; for each edge e, taken in arbitrary order T D T [ feg if T has a cycle c let e0 be a maximum-weight edge on c T D T  fe0g return T Chapter notes Tarjan [330] surveys the minimum-spanning-tree problem and provides excellent advanced material. Graham and Hell [151] compiled a history of the minimumspanning-tree problem.

Tarjan attributes the ﬁrst minimum-spanning-tree algorithm to a 1926 paper by O. Bor˙uvka. Bor˙uvka’s algorithm consists of running O.lg V / iterations of the

procedure MST-REDUCE described in Problem 23-2. Kruskal’s algorithm was reported by Kruskal [222] in 1956. The algorithm commonly known as Prim’s algorithm was indeed invented by Prim [285], but it was also invented earlier by V. Jarn´ık in 1930. The reason underlying why greedy algorithms are effective at ﬁnding minimum spanning trees is that the set of forests of a graph forms a graphic matroid. (See Section 16.4.) When jEj D .V lg V /, Prim’s algorithm, implemented with Fibonacci heaps, runs in O.E/ time. For sparser graphs, using a combination of the ideas from Prim’s algorithm, Kruskal’s algorithm, and Bor˙uvka’s algorithm, together with advanced data structures, Fredman and Tarjan [114] give an algorithm that runs in O.E lg V / time. Gabow, Galil, Spencer, and Tarjan [120] improved this algorithm to run in O.E lg lg V / time. Chazelle [60] gives an algorithm that runs in O.E y˛.E; V // time, where y˛.E; V / is the functional inverse of Ackermann’s function. (See the chapter notes for Chapter 21 for a brief discussion of Ackermann’s function and its inverse.) Unlike previous minimum-spanning-tree algorithms, Chazelle’s algorithm does not follow the greedy method.

A related problem is spanning-tree veriﬁcation, in which we are given a graph G D .V; E/ and a tree T  E, and we wish to determine whether T is a minimum spanning tree of G. King [203] gives a linear-time algorithm to verify a spanning tree, building on earlier work of Koml´os [215] and Dixon, Rauch, and Tarjan [90]. The above algorithms are all deterministic and fall into the comparison-based model described in Chapter 8. Karger, Klein, and Tarjan [195] give a randomized minimum-spanning-tree algorithm that runs in O.V C E/ expected time. This algorithm uses recursion in a manner similar to the linear-time selection algorithm in Section 9.3: a recursive call on an auxiliary problem identiﬁes a subset of the edges E0 that cannot be in any minimum spanning tree. Another recursive call on E  E0 then ﬁnds the minimum spanning tree. The algorithm also uses ideas from Bor˙uvka’s algorithm and King’s algorithm for spanning-tree veriﬁcation.

Fredman and Willard [116] showed how to ﬁnd a minimum spanning tree in O.V CE/ time using a deterministic algorithm that is not comparison based. Their algorithm assumes that the data are b-bit integers and that the computer memory consists of addressable b-bit words.
