# V Advanced Data Structures

V Advanced Data Structures

Introduction This part returns to studying data structures that support operations on dynamic sets, but at a more advanced level than Part III. Two of the chapters, for example, make extensive use of the amortized analysis techniques we saw in Chapter 17.

Chapter 18 presents B-trees, which are balanced search trees speciﬁcally designed to be stored on disks.

Because disks operate much more slowly than random-access memory, we measure the performance of B-trees not only by how much computing time the dynamic-set operations consume but also by how many disk accesses they perform. For each B-tree operation, the number of disk accesses increases with the height of the B-tree, but B-tree operations keep the height low.

Chapter 19 gives an implementation of a mergeable heap, which supports the operations INSERT, MINIMUM, EXTRACT-MIN, and UNION.1 The UNION operation unites, or merges, two heaps. Fibonacci heaps—the data structure in Chapter 19—also support the operations DELETE and DECREASE-KEY. We use amortized time bounds to measure the performance of Fibonacci heaps. The operations INSERT, MINIMUM, and UNION take only O.1/ actual and amortized time on Fibonacci heaps, and the operations EXTRACT-MIN and DELETE take O.lg n/ amortized time. The most signiﬁcant advantage of Fibonacci heaps, however, is that DECREASE-KEY takes only O.1/ amortized time. Because the DECREASE- 1As in Problem 10-2, we have deﬁned a mergeable heap to support MINIMUM and EXTRACT-MIN, and so we can also refer to it as a mergeable min-heap. Alternatively, if it supported MAXIMUM and EXTRACT-MAX, it would be a mergeable max-heap. Unless we specify otherwise, mergeable heaps will be by default mergeable min-heaps.

Part V Advanced Data Structures KEY operation takes constant amortized time, Fibonacci heaps are key components of some of the asymptotically fastest algorithms to date for graph problems. Noting that we can beat the .n lg n/ lower bound for sorting when the keys are integers in a restricted range, Chapter 20 asks whether we can design a data structure that supports the dynamic-set operations SEARCH, INSERT, DELETE, MINIMUM, MAXIMUM, SUCCESSOR, and PREDECESSOR in o.lg n/ time when the keys are integers in a restricted range. The answer turns out to be that we can, by using a recursive data structure known as a van Emde Boas tree. If the keys are unique integers drawn from the set f0; 1; 2; : : : ; u  1g, where u is an exact power of 2, then van Emde Boas trees support each of the above operations in O.lg lg u/ time.

Finally, Chapter 21 presents data structures for disjoint sets. We have a universe of n elements that are partitioned into dynamic sets. Initially, each element belongs to its own singleton set. The operation UNION unites two sets, and the query FIND- SET identiﬁes the unique set that contains a given element at the moment. By representing each set as a simple rooted tree, we obtain surprisingly fast operations: a sequence of m operations runs in O.m ˛.n// time, where ˛.n/ is an incredibly slowly growing function—˛.n/ is at most 4 in any conceivable application. The amortized analysis that proves this time bound is as complex as the data structure is simple. The topics covered in this part are by no means the only examples of “advanced” data structures. Other advanced data structures include the following:  Dynamic trees, introduced by Sleator and Tarjan [319] and discussed by Tarjan [330], maintain a forest of disjoint rooted trees. Each edge in each tree has a real-valued cost. Dynamic trees support queries to ﬁnd parents, roots, edge costs, and the minimum edge cost on a simple path from a node up to a root.

Trees may be manipulated by cutting edges, updating all edge costs on a simple path from a node up to a root, linking a root into another tree, and making a node the root of the tree it appears in. One implementation of dynamic trees gives an O.lg n/ amortized time bound for each operation; a more complicated implementation yields O.lg n/ worst-case time bounds. Dynamic trees are used in some of the asymptotically fastest network-ﬂow algorithms.  Splay trees, developed by Sleator and Tarjan [320] and, again, discussed by Tarjan [330], are a form of binary search tree on which the standard searchtree operations run in O.lg n/ amortized time. One application of splay trees simpliﬁes dynamic trees.  Persistent data structures allow queries, and sometimes updates as well, on past versions of a data structure. Driscoll, Sarnak, Sleator, and Tarjan [97] present techniques for making linked data structures persistent with only a small time

Part V Advanced Data Structures and space cost. Problem 13-1 gives a simple example of a persistent dynamic set.  As in Chapter 20, several data structures allow a faster implementation of dictionary operations (INSERT, DELETE, and SEARCH) for a restricted universe of keys. By taking advantage of these restrictions, they are able to achieve better worst-case asymptotic running times than comparison-based data structures.

Fredman and Willard introduced fusion trees [115], which were the ﬁrst data structure to allow faster dictionary operations when the universe is restricted to integers. They showed how to implement these operations in O.lg n= lg lg n/ time. Several subsequent data structures, including exponential search trees [16], have also given improved bounds on some or all of the dictionary operations and are mentioned in the chapter notes throughout this book.  Dynamic graph data structures support various queries while allowing the structure of a graph to change through operations that insert or delete vertices or edges. Examples of the queries that they support include vertex connectivity [166], edge connectivity, minimum spanning trees [165], biconnectivity, and transitive closure [164].

Chapter notes throughout this book mention additional data structures.
