# VII Selected Topics

VII Selected Topics

Introduction This part contains a selection of algorithmic topics that extend and complement earlier material in this book. Some chapters introduce new models of computation such as circuits or parallel computers. Others cover specialized domains such as computational geometry or number theory. The last two chapters discuss some of the known limitations to the design of efﬁcient algorithms and introduce techniques for coping with those limitations.

Chapter 27 presents an algorithmic model for parallel computing based on dynamic multithreading. The chapter introduces the basics of the model, showing how to quantify parallelism in terms of the measures of work and span. It then investigates several interesting multithreaded algorithms, including algorithms for matrix multiplication and merge sorting.

Chapter 28 studies efﬁcient algorithms for operating on matrices. It presents two general methods—LU decomposition and LUP decomposition—for solving linear equations by Gaussian elimination in O.n3/ time. It also shows that matrix inversion and matrix multiplication can be performed equally fast. The chapter concludes by showing how to compute a least-squares approximate solution when a set of linear equations has no exact solution.

Chapter 29 studies linear programming, in which we wish to maximize or minimize an objective, given limited resources and competing constraints. Linear programming arises in a variety of practical application areas. This chapter covers how to formulate and solve linear programs. The solution method covered is the simplex algorithm, which is the oldest algorithm for linear programming. In contrast to many algorithms in this book, the simplex algorithm does not run in polynomial time in the worst case, but it is fairly efﬁcient and widely used in practice.

Part VII Selected Topics Chapter 30 studies operations on polynomials and shows how to use a wellknown signal-processing technique—the fast Fourier transform (FFT)—to multiply two degree-n polynomials in O.n lg n/ time. It also investigates efﬁcient implementations of the FFT, including a parallel circuit.

Chapter 31 presents number-theoretic algorithms. After reviewing elementary number theory, it presents Euclid’s algorithm for computing greatest common divisors. Next, it studies algorithms for solving modular linear equations and for raising one number to a power modulo another number. Then, it explores an important application of number-theoretic algorithms: the RSA public-key cryptosystem. This cryptosystem can be used not only to encrypt messages so that an adversary cannot read them, but also to provide digital signatures. The chapter then presents the Miller-Rabin randomized primality test, with which we can ﬁnd large primes efﬁciently—an essential requirement for the RSA system. Finally, the chapter covers Pollard’s “rho” heuristic for factoring integers and discusses the state of the art of integer factorization.

Chapter 32 studies the problem of ﬁnding all occurrences of a given pattern string in a given text string, a problem that arises frequently in text-editing programs. After examining the naive approach, the chapter presents an elegant approach due to Rabin and Karp. Then, after showing an efﬁcient solution based on ﬁnite automata, the chapter presents the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm, which modiﬁes the automaton-based algorithm to save space by cleverly preprocessing the pattern.

Chapter 33 considers a few problems in computational geometry. After discussing basic primitives of computational geometry, the chapter shows how to use a “sweeping” method to efﬁciently determine whether a set of line segments contains any intersections. Two clever algorithms for ﬁnding the convex hull of a set of points—Graham’s scan and Jarvis’s march—also illustrate the power of sweeping methods. The chapter closes with an efﬁcient algorithm for ﬁnding the closest pair from among a given set of points in the plane.

Chapter 34 concerns NP-complete problems. Many interesting computational problems are NP-complete, but no polynomial-time algorithm is known for solving any of them. This chapter presents techniques for determining when a problem is NP-complete. Several classic problems are proved to be NP-complete: determining whether a graph has a hamiltonian cycle, determining whether a boolean formula is satisﬁable, and determining whether a given set of numbers has a subset that adds up to a given target value. The chapter also proves that the famous travelingsalesman problem is NP-complete.

Chapter 35 shows how to ﬁnd approximate solutions to NP-complete problems efﬁciently by using approximation algorithms. For some NP-complete problems, approximate solutions that are near optimal are quite easy to produce, but for others even the best approximation algorithms known work progressively more poorly as

Part VII Selected Topics the problem size increases. Then, there are some problems for which we can invest increasing amounts of computation time in return for increasingly better approximate solutions. This chapter illustrates these possibilities with the vertex-cover problem (unweighted and weighted versions), an optimization version of 3-CNF satisﬁability, the traveling-salesman problem, the set-covering problem, and the subset-sum problem.
